README.md, before:

# COVID-19 Workflow

COVID-19 Multiscale Modelling of the Virus and Patients’ Tissue

## Table of Contents

- [COVID-19 Workflow](#covid-19-workflow)
  - [Table of Contents](#table-of-contents)
  - [Description](#description)
  - [Contents](#contents)
    - [Building Blocks](#building-blocks)
    - [Workflows](#workflows)
    - [Resources](#resources)
    - [Tests](#tests)
  - [Instructions](#instructions)
    - [Local machine](#local-machine)
      - [Requirements](#requirements)
      - [Usage steps](#usage-steps)
    - [MareNostrum 4](#marenostrum-4)
      - [Requirements in MN4](#requirements-in-mn4)
      - [Usage steps in MN4](#usage-steps-in-mn4)
  - [Contact](#contact)

## Description

TO BE COMPLETED

## Contents

### Building Blocks

The ``BuildingBlocks`` folder contains the script to install the
Building Blocks used in the COVID-19 Workflow.

### Workflows

The ``Workflow`` folder contains the workflows implementations.

Currently contains the implementation using PyCOMPSs and Snakemake (in progress).

### Resources

The ``Resources`` folder contains dataset files.

### Tests

The ``Tests`` folder contains the scripts that run each Building Block
used in the workflow for the given small dataset.
They can be executed individually for testing purposes.

## Instructions

### Local machine

This section explains the requirements and usage for the COVID19 Workflow in a laptop or desktop computer.

#### Requirements

- [`permedcoe`](https://github.com/PerMedCoE/permedcoe) package
- [PyCOMPSs](https://pycompss.readthedocs.io/en/stable/Sections/00_Quickstart.html)
- [Singularity](https://sylabs.io/guides/3.0/user-guide/installation.html)

#### Usage steps

1. Clone the `BuildingBlocks` repository

   ```bash
   git clone https://github.com/PerMedCoE/BuildingBlocks.git
   ```

2. Build the required Building Block images

   ```bash
   cd BuildingBlocks/Resources/images
   sudo singularity build MaBoSS.sif MaBoSS.singularity
   sudo singularity build meta_analysis.sif meta_analysis.singularity
   sudo singularity build PhysiCell-COVID19.sif PhysiCell-COVID19.singularity
   sudo singularity build single_cell.sif single_cell.singularity
   cd ../../..
   ```

   > :warning: **TIP**: The singularity containers **can to be downloaded** from the project [B2DROP](https://b2drop.bsc.es/index.php/f/444350).


3. Clone this repository

   ```bash
   git clone https://github.com/PerMedCoE/covid-19-workflow.git
   ```

4. Install the `BuildingBlocks` package

   ```bash
   cd BuildingBlocks && ./install.sh && cd ..
   ```

5. Go to `Workflow/PyCOMPSs` folder

   ```bash
   cd Workflows/PyCOMPSs
   ```

6. Execute `./run.sh`

The execution is prepared to use the singularity images that **MUST** be placed into `BuildingBlocks/Resources/images` folder.
If they are located in any other folder, please update the `run.sh` script setting the `PERMEDCOE_IMAGES` to the images folder accordingly.

> **TIP**: If you want to run the workflow with a different dataset, please update the `run.sh` script setting the `dataset` variable to the new dataset folder and their file names.

### MareNostrum 4

This section explains the requirements and usage for the COVID19 Workflow in the MareNostrum 4 supercomputer.

#### Requirements in MN4

- Access to MN4

All Building Blocks are already installed in MN4, and the COVID19 Workflow available.

#### Usage steps in MN4

1. Load the `COMPSs`, `Singularity` and `permedcoe` modules

   ```bash
   export COMPSS_PYTHON_VERSION=3
   module load COMPSs/2.10
   module load singularity/3.5.2
   module use /apps/modules/modulefiles/tools/COMPSs/libraries
   module load permedcoe
   ```

   > **TIP**: Include the loading into your `${HOME}/.bashrc` file to load it automatically on the session start.

   This commands will load COMPSs and the permedcoe package which provides all necessary dependencies, as well as the path to the singularity container images (`PERMEDCOE_IMAGES` environment variable) and testing dataset (`COVID19WORKFLOW_DATASET` environment variable).

2. Get a copy of the pilot workflow into your desired folder

   ```bash
   mkdir desired_folder
   cd desired_folder
   get_covid19workflow
   ```

3. Go to `Workflow/PyCOMPSs` folder

   ```bash
   cd Workflow/PyCOMPSs
   ```

4. Execute `./launch.sh`

This command will launch a job into the job queuing system (SLURM) requesting 2 nodes (one node acting half master and half worker, and other full worker node) for 20 minutes, and is prepared to use the singularity images that are already deployed in MN4 (located into the `PERMEDCOE_IMAGES` environment variable). It uses the dataset located into `../../Resources/data` folder.

> :warning: **TIP**: If you want to run the workflow with a different dataset, please edit the `launch.sh` script and define the appropriate dataset path.

After the execution, a `results` folder will be available with with COVID19 Workflow results.

## Contact

<https://permedcoe.eu/contact/>

Commit message:

Updated documentation and added License.

README.md, after:

# COVID-19 Multiscale Modelling of the Virus and Patients’ Tissue Workflow

## Table of Contents

- [COVID-19 Multiscale Modelling of the Virus and Patients’ Tissue Workflow](#covid-19-multiscale-modelling-of-the-virus-and-patients-tissue-workflow)
  - [Table of Contents](#table-of-contents)
  - [Description](#description)
  - [Contents](#contents)
    - [Building Blocks](#building-blocks)
    - [Workflows](#workflows)
    - [Resources](#resources)
    - [Tests](#tests)
  - [Instructions](#instructions)
    - [Local machine](#local-machine)
      - [Requirements](#requirements)
      - [Usage steps](#usage-steps)
    - [MareNostrum 4](#marenostrum-4)
      - [Requirements in MN4](#requirements-in-mn4)
      - [Usage steps in MN4](#usage-steps-in-mn4)
  - [License](#license)
  - [Contact](#contact)

## Description

Uses multiscale simulations to predict patient-specific SARS‑CoV‑2 severity subtypes
(moderate, severe or control), using single-cell RNA-Seq data, MaBoSS and PhysiBoSS.
Boolean models are used to determine the behaviour of individual agents as a function
of extracellular conditions and the concentration of different  substrates, including
the number of virions. Predictions of severity subtypes are based on a meta-analysis of
personalised model outputs simulating cellular apoptosis regulation in epithelial cells
infected by SARS‑CoV‑2.

The workflow uses the following building blocks, described in order of execution:

1. High-throughput mutant analysis
2. Single-cell processing
3. Personalise patient
4. PhysiBoSS
5. Analysis of all simulations

For details on individual workflow steps, see the user documentation for each building block.

[`GitHub repository`](<https://github.com/PerMedCoE/covid-19-workflow>)


## Contents

### Building Blocks

The ``BuildingBlocks`` folder contains the script to install the
Building Blocks used in the COVID-19 Workflow.

### Workflows

The ``Workflow`` folder contains the workflows implementations.

Currently contains the implementation using PyCOMPSs and Snakemake (in progress).

### Resources

The ``Resources`` folder contains dataset files.

### Tests

The ``Tests`` folder contains the scripts that run each Building Block
used in the workflow for the given small dataset.
They can be executed individually for testing purposes.

## Instructions

### Local machine

This section explains the requirements and usage for the COVID19 Workflow in a laptop or desktop computer.

#### Requirements

- [`permedcoe`](https://github.com/PerMedCoE/permedcoe) package
- [PyCOMPSs](https://pycompss.readthedocs.io/en/stable/Sections/00_Quickstart.html)
- [Singularity](https://sylabs.io/guides/3.0/user-guide/installation.html)

#### Usage steps

1. Clone the `BuildingBlocks` repository

   ```bash
   git clone https://github.com/PerMedCoE/BuildingBlocks.git
   ```

2. Build the required Building Block images

   ```bash
   cd BuildingBlocks/Resources/images
   sudo singularity build MaBoSS.sif MaBoSS.singularity
   sudo singularity build meta_analysis.sif meta_analysis.singularity
   sudo singularity build PhysiCell-COVID19.sif PhysiCell-COVID19.singularity
   sudo singularity build single_cell.sif single_cell.singularity
   cd ../../..
   ```

   > :warning: **TIP**: The singularity containers **can to be downloaded** from the project [B2DROP](https://b2drop.bsc.es/index.php/f/444350).


3. Clone this repository

   ```bash
   git clone https://github.com/PerMedCoE/covid-19-workflow.git
   ```

4. Install the `BuildingBlocks` package

   ```bash
   cd BuildingBlocks && ./install.sh && cd ..
   ```

5. Go to `Workflow/PyCOMPSs` folder

   ```bash
   cd Workflows/PyCOMPSs
   ```

6. Execute `./run.sh`

The execution is prepared to use the singularity images that **MUST** be placed into `BuildingBlocks/Resources/images` folder.
If they are located in any other folder, please update the `run.sh` script setting the `PERMEDCOE_IMAGES` to the images folder accordingly.

> **TIP**: If you want to run the workflow with a different dataset, please update the `run.sh` script setting the `dataset` variable to the new dataset folder and their file names.

### MareNostrum 4

This section explains the requirements and usage for the COVID19 Workflow in the MareNostrum 4 supercomputer.

#### Requirements in MN4

- Access to MN4

All Building Blocks are already installed in MN4, and the COVID19 Workflow available.

#### Usage steps in MN4

1. Load the `COMPSs`, `Singularity` and `permedcoe` modules

   ```bash
   export COMPSS_PYTHON_VERSION=3
   module load COMPSs/2.10
   module load singularity/3.5.2
   module use /apps/modules/modulefiles/tools/COMPSs/libraries
   module load permedcoe
   ```

   > **TIP**: Include the loading into your `${HOME}/.bashrc` file to load it automatically on the session start.

   This commands will load COMPSs and the permedcoe package which provides all necessary dependencies, as well as the path to the singularity container images (`PERMEDCOE_IMAGES` environment variable) and testing dataset (`COVID19WORKFLOW_DATASET` environment variable).

2. Get a copy of the pilot workflow into your desired folder

   ```bash
   mkdir desired_folder
   cd desired_folder
   get_covid19workflow
   ```

3. Go to `Workflow/PyCOMPSs` folder

   ```bash
   cd Workflow/PyCOMPSs
   ```

4. Execute `./launch.sh`

This command will launch a job into the job queuing system (SLURM) requesting 2 nodes (one node acting half master and half worker, and other full worker node) for 20 minutes, and is prepared to use the singularity images that are already deployed in MN4 (located into the `PERMEDCOE_IMAGES` environment variable). It uses the dataset located into `../../Resources/data` folder.

> :warning: **TIP**: If you want to run the workflow with a different dataset, please edit the `launch.sh` script and define the appropriate dataset path.

After the execution, a `results` folder will be available with with COVID19 Workflow results.

## License

[Apache 2.0](https://www.apache.org/licenses/LICENSE-2.0)

## Contact

<https://permedcoe.eu/contact/>
